Add NetFx -> NetCore porting documentation for C++/CLI projects (#16252)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/porting/cppcli.md

> ---

Reviewer: should the filename be cpp-cli? usually individual words are separated by hyphen

Author: Yes, that makes sense. I'll update it to be cpp-cli.

> title: Tools for porting to .NET Core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How to port a C++/CLI project to .NET Core
```

Reviewer 3: It's actually beneficial from an SEO perspective to use different terms in the metadata title than the H1 title.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.

Author: I'll update this to be more accurate while still being a little different from the H1.

> description: Learn about porting C++/CLI projects to .NET Core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about porting C++/CLI projects to .NET Core.
```

author: mjrousos

> ms.author: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ms.author: mikerou
```

Author: I actually left this one blank since I wasn't sure if I should be the ms.author or if it should be a dedicated UE person. I can work on docs intermittently in between customer engagements, but may not be able to respond promptly all the time. Is there a usual practice for when a 'non-UE' person submits docs?

Reviewer 3: @mairaw What's your suggestion? We do need a value, otherwise we get a build warning.

Reviewer: No need. Phillip is the ms.author for the porting folder
https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/master/docfx.json#L184

ms.date: 12/12/2019
---

# How to port a C++/CLI project to .NET Core

> Beginning with .NET Core 3.1 and Visual Studio 2019 16.4, C++/CLI projects can be updated to target .NET Core. This allows Windows desktop applications which may use C++/CLI projects as an interop layer between managed and native code to be ported to .NET Core. This article describes how to port C++/CLI projects from .NET Framework to .NET Core 3.1.

Reviewer 2: Is there a good link for `C++/CLI` to add here?

Author: I'll add a link.

> Beginning with .NET Core 3.1 and Visual Studio 2019 16.4, C++/CLI projects can be updated to target .NET Core. This allows Windows desktop applications which may use C++/CLI projects as an interop layer between managed and native code to be ported to .NET Core. This article describes how to port C++/CLI projects from .NET Framework to .NET Core 3.1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Beginning with .NET Core 3.1 and Visual Studio 2019 version 16.4, C++/CLI projects can be updated to target .NET Core. This allows Windows desktop applications that use C++/CLI projects as an interop layer between managed and native code to be ported to .NET Core. This article describes how to port C++/CLI projects from .NET Framework to .NET Core 3.1.
```

> Beginning with .NET Core 3.1 and Visual Studio 2019 version 16.4, [C++/CLI projects](https://docs.microsoft.com/cpp/dotnet/dotnet-programming-with-cpp-cli-visual-cpp) can target .NET Core. This support makes it possible to port Windows desktop applications with C++/CLI interop layers to .NET Core. This article describes how to port C++/CLI projects from .NET Framework to .NET Core 3.1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Beginning with .NET Core 3.1 and Visual Studio 2019 version 16.4, [C++/CLI projects](/cpp/dotnet/dotnet-programming-with-cpp-cli-visual-cpp) can target .NET Core. This support makes it possible to port Windows desktop applications with C++/CLI interop layers to .NET Core. This article describes how to port C++/CLI projects from .NET Framework to .NET Core 3.1.
```

Reviewer 3: This makes the link work in offline books.

## C++/CLI .NET Core limitations

> There are some important limitations to porting C++/CLI projects to .NET Core compared to C# or VB projects:

Reviewer 2: I'd drop the `C# or VB` projects part. You'll get some F# developers tweeting at you for ignoring them 🙂 

But more seriously, since the following points have nothing to do with a language, it's best to just say they're different from "typical" .NET Core projects.

* C++/CLI support for .NET Core is Windows only.
* C++/CLI projects cannot target .NET Standard, only .NET Core (or, of course, .NET Framework).
* C++/CLI projects do not support the new SDK-style project file format. Instead, even when targeting .NET Core, C++/CLI projects use the existing vcxproj file format.

>   * Because of this, C++/CLI projects cannot multitarget multiple .NET platforms. If you need to build a C++/CLI project for both .NET Framework and .NET Core, use separate project files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Because of this, C++/CLI projects cannot multitarget multiple .NET platforms. If you need to build a C++/CLI project for both .NET Framework and .NET Core, use separate project files.
```

Reviewer 3: Since there's only a single bullet, just remove it.

> * .NET Core does not support /clr:pure or /clr:safe compilation, only the new /clr:netcore option (which is equivalent to /clr for .NET Framework).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* .NET Core does not support `/clr:pure` or `/clr:safe` compilation, only the new `/clr:netcore` option (which is equivalent to `/clr` for .NET Framework).
```

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if the `-` can be used here instead of `/`.
See https://github.com/dotnet/docs/issues/9958#issuecomment-460437418.

Author: Both `-` and `/` [work ](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/compiler-options?view=vs-2019) for cl.exe and link.exe. I'll switch to `-`.

> ## C++/CLI porting process

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Port a C++/CLI project
```

> To port a C++/CLI project to .NET Core, make the following changes to the vcxproj project file:

Reviewer 2: I'd reinforce that the lack of SDK-style projects here also affects how you port, since this is not the same guidance we have for other project types.

1. Replace `<CLRSupport>true</CLRSupport>` properties with `<CLRSupport>NetCore</CLRSupport>`.

>     1. Be aware that this property is often in configuration- and platform-specific property groups, so it may need to be replaced in multiple places.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   This property is often in configuration-specific and platform-specific property groups, so it may need to be replaced in multiple places.
```

2. Replace `<TargetFrameworkVersion>` properties with `<TargetFramework>netcoreapp3.1</TargetFramework>`.
3. Remove any .NET Framework references (like `<Reference Include="System" />`). .NET Core SDK assemblies are automatically referenced when using `<CLRSupport>NetCore</CLRSupport>`.
4. Update API usage in cpp files, as necessary, to remove APIs unavailable to .NET Core. Because C++/CLI projects tend to be fairly thin interop layers, there are often not many API changes needed.

>     1. The [.NET Portability Analyzer](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/analyzers/portability-analyzer) can be used to identify unsupported .NET APIs used by C++/CLI binaries just as with purely managed binaries. Guidelines for determining code portability and updating projects to work with .NET Core APIs are available in the [library porting guidance](./libraries.md#determining-the-portability-of-your-code).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The [.NET Portability Analyzer](../../standard/analyzers/portability-analyzer.md) can be used to identify unsupported .NET APIs used by C++/CLI binaries just as with purely managed binaries. Guidelines for determining code portability and updating projects to work with .NET Core APIs are available in the [library porting guidance](./libraries.md#determining-the-portability-of-your-code).
```

### WPF and Windows Forms usage

> C++/CLI projects that use Windows Forms or WPF APIs can be ported to .NET Core, but need explicit framework references to the UI libraries. SDK-style projects that use Windows desktop APIs reference the necessary framework libraries automatically by using the `Microsoft.NET.Sdk.WindowsDesktop` SDK. Because C++/CLI projects don't use the SDK-style project format, they need to add explicit framework references when targeting .NET Core.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
C++/CLI projects that use Windows Forms or WPF APIs can be ported to .NET Core but need explicit framework references to the UI libraries. SDK-style projects that use Windows desktop APIs reference the necessary framework libraries automatically by using the `Microsoft.NET.Sdk.WindowsDesktop` SDK. Because C++/CLI projects don't use the SDK-style project format, they need to add explicit framework references when targeting .NET Core.
```

> To use Windows Forms APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use Windows Forms APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj file:
```

```xml
<!-- Reference all of Windows Forms -->
<FrameworkReference Include="Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App.WindowsForms" />
```

> To use WPF APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use WPF APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj file:
```

```xml
<!-- Reference all of WPF -->
<FrameworkReference Include="Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App.WPF" />
```

> To use both Windows Forms and WPF APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use both Windows Forms and WPF APIs, add this reference to the vcxproj file:
```

```xml
<!-- Reference the entirety of the Windows desktop framework:
     Windows Forms, WPF, and the types that provide integration between them -->
<FrameworkReference Include="Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App" />
```

> Currently, it is not possible to add these references using Visual Studio's reference manager. The project file needs to be updated manually.

Reviewer 2: Does that mean you need to unload the project and edit it that way, or do these projects  load in CPS (and therefore you need only double-click the project file node in VS)?

Author: Need to unload (or open with VS Code, etc.). I'll clarify that.

> Currently, it is not possible to add these references using Visual Studio's reference manager. The project file needs to be updated manually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, it's not possible to add these references using Visual Studio's reference manager. Instead, update the project file manually.
```

> ## Building without MSBuild

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Build without MSBuild
```

> The MSBuild project system makes it easy to port a vcxproj-based project to .NET Core. If you need to build a C++/CLI project for .NET Core directly with cl.exe and link.exe, it can be done with a few additional steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MSBuild project system makes it easy to port a vcxproj-based project to .NET Core. If you need to build a C++/CLI project for .NET Core directly with **cl.exe** and **link.exe**, it can be done with a few additional steps.
```

Reviewer 4: @cartermp, Actually, the current style is to use italics for file names, not bold.

```suggestion
The MSBuild project system makes it easy to port a vcxproj-based project to .NET Core. If you need to build a C++/CLI project for .NET Core directly with *cl.exe* and *link.exe*, it can be done with a few additional steps.
```

> 1. When compiling, pass `/clr:netcore` to cl.exe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When compiling, pass `/clr:netcore` to **cl.exe**.
```

> 1. When compiling, pass `/clr:netcore` to cl.exe.

Reviewer 4: @cartermp, same as previous.

```suggestion
1. When compiling, pass `/clr:netcore` to *cl.exe*.
```

Wondering also if the `-` can be used here. (https://github.com/dotnet/docs/issues/9958#issuecomment-460437418)

Author: Yep, I've updated to `-clr:netcore`.

2. Reference necessary .NET Core reference assemblies.

> 3. When linking, provide the .NET Core app host directory as a LibPath (so that ijwhost.lib can be found).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. When linking, provide the .NET Core app host directory as a `LibPath` (so that **ijwhost.lib** can be found).
```

> 4. Copy ijwhost.dll (from the .NET Core app host directory) to the project's output directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Copy **ijwhost.dll** (from the .NET Core app host directory) to the project's output directory.
```

> 5. Make sure a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file exists for the first component of the application that will run managed code. If the application has a managed entry point, this will be created and copied automatically. If the application has a native entry point, though, and a C++/CLI library will be the first time the process uses the .NET Core runtime, you will need to create a runtimeconfig.json file for the library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Make sure a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file exists for the first component of the application that will run managed code. If the application has a managed entry point, this will be created and copied automatically. If the application has a native entry point, though, and a C++/CLI library will be the first time the process uses the .NET Core runtime, you will need to create a `runtimeconfig.json` file for the library.
```

## Known issues

There are a couple known issues to look out for when working with C++/CLI projects targeting .NET Core.

> 1. If the application has a native entry point, the C++/CLI library that first executes managed code needs a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file to be used when the .NET Core runtime is started. C++/CLI projects don't create .runtimeconfig.json files automatically at build time yet, so the file must be generated manually. If a C++/CLI library is called from a managed entry point (which will have its own .runtimeconfig.json file), then the C++/CLI library doesn't need a .runtimeconfig.json file of its own. A simple sample .runtimeconfig.json file looks like this (see the [spec on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) for more details):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If the application has a native entry point, the C++/CLI library that first executes managed code needs a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file to be used when the .NET Core runtime is started. C++/CLI projects don't create `.runtimeconfig.json` files automatically at build time yet, so the file must be generated manually. If a C++/CLI library is called from a managed entry point (which will have its own `.runtimeconfig.json` file), then the C++/CLI library doesn't need a `.runtimeconfig.json` file of its own. A simple sample `.runtimeconfig.json` file looks like this (see the [spec on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) for more details):
```

> 1. If the application has a native entry point, the C++/CLI library that first executes managed code needs a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file to be used when the .NET Core runtime is started. C++/CLI projects don't create .runtimeconfig.json files automatically at build time yet, so the file must be generated manually. If a C++/CLI library is called from a managed entry point (which will have its own .runtimeconfig.json file), then the C++/CLI library doesn't need a .runtimeconfig.json file of its own. A simple sample .runtimeconfig.json file looks like this (see the [spec on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) for more details):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If the application has a native entry point, the C++/CLI library that first executes managed code needs a [.runtimeconfig.json](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) file to be used when the .NET Core runtime is started. C++/CLI projects don't create .runtimeconfig.json files automatically at build time yet, so the file must be generated manually. If a C++/CLI library is called from a managed entry point (which will have its own .runtimeconfig.json file), then the C++/CLI library doesn't need a .runtimeconfig.json file of its own. A simple sample .runtimeconfig.json file looks like this (see the [spec on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/cli/blob/master/Documentation/specs/runtime-configuration-file.md) for more details):
```

    ```json
    {
          "runtimeOptions": {
             "tfm": "netcoreapp3.1",
             "framework": {
                "name": "Microsoft.NETCore.App",
                "version": "3.1.0"
             }
          }
    }
    ```

> 2. A WPF framework reference in C++/CLI projects currently causes some extraneous warnings about being unable to import symbols. These can be safely ignored and should be fixed soon.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A WPF framework reference in C++/CLI projects currently causes some extraneous warnings about being unable to import symbols. These can be safely ignored and should be fixed soon.
```
Since these two points aren't part of an ordered procedure, just use bullets.
